API
======

The main entry point to SES is
``const s = SES.makeSESRootRealm(options)``. This creates a new SES
“root” Realm, in which all primordials are frozen, all sources of
non-determinism are disabled, and all means of escape are blocked off.

The main utility of this new ``s`` object (which we might call the
“realm controller”) is the ``s.evaluate()`` method. This currently takes
two arguments: ``s.evaluate(code, endowments)``. ``code`` is a string
that defines a javascript expression, and ``endowments`` is an object
whose properties will be made available in the global lexical scope of
that expression.

The code is evaluated in a new global object, so assigning anything to
it is not generally useful: ``s.evaluate('let a = 3')`` is legal, but
useless, since a subsequent ``s.evaluate('a+1')`` won’t see the same
``a``. On the other hand, ``s.evaluate('let a = 3; a+1')`` will yield 4,
because the same ``a`` is in scope throughout both parts of the same
evaluation.

The code is evaluated as an expression, so to get a function object back
out, you must wrap it in parenthesis, or evaluate an arrow function:

::

   let d1 = s.evaluate('(function double(a) { return a+a; })');
   d1(1); // 2
   let d2 = s.evaluate('(function(a) { return a+a; })');
   d2(1); // 2, function is anonymous
   let d3 = s.evaluate('a => a+a');
   d3(1); // 2

``s.evaluate()`` takes a string, but usually you write javascript in
files with an editor, so there are some tricks to make it comfortable to
edit the code you’re going to submit to be evaluated. Most (but not
all!) javascript engines will remember the source code of the functions
you define, and stringifying the function object (e.g. with the backtick
“template literal” operator) will retrieve its source code. We can use
this to write a function as usual, then pass its stringified form into
evaluate:

.. code:: js


   // we define inner but never invoke it in the outer realm, it exists only to be
   // stringified
   function inner(a) {
     return a+a;
   }

   let d4 = s.evaluate(`(${inner})`);

caveats: ``inner`` must not reference anything outside its curly
brackets, as that won’t be available during its evaluation (i.e. it
cannot “close over” variables from outside, as cool as that’d be). On
the other hand, you can use “endowments” to provide names that this will
look up:

.. code:: js


   // note: 'b' is not defined anywhere in the outer realm. Within the definition of 'inner', it is
   // an unbound/free variable. Many linters and editors will notice this and complain.
   function inner(a) {
     return a+b;
   }

   let d5 = s.evaluate(`(${inner})`, { b: 2 });
   d5(1); // 3

You can evaluate an entire file, with multiple function definitions that
reference each other, but only the final expression will be returned.

You may want to use ``rollup`` or some bundling tool with an API to turn
multiple files into a single string. These source files can
``require()`` (CommonJS-mode) or ``import`` (ES6-module mode) each
other, but the final string must not have any require/import statements,
because ``s.evaluate()`` only evaluates a string and does not do module
lookup (but see ``s.makeRequire()`` for a helper function that can
provide something similar to ``require()``).

Endowments are provided in the global lexical scope of the code being
evaluated, where they can be referenced with free variables. The “global
lexical scope” is not the same thing as the “global object”. Using
``this`` at the top level of the evaluated code references a sort of
global object (which is frozen), which has properties like ``Number``
and ``Array`` but not the endowments.

TODO: an example that shows the differences between ``this.a=3`` (which
fails because the sort-of-global object is frozen), ``let a = 3`` (which
modifies the other kind of global object, which is not frozen, but which
goes out of scope at the end of evaluation), ``let a = 3`` with
``endowments=x={}`` (which I think shadows the endowment in the
ephemeral global object and does *not* set ``x.a=3`` in the outer
realm), and ``a+1`` (which probably looks at the ephemeral global object
first, then falls back to the endowment)

Another common way to pass endowments is as arguments to a generated
function.

.. code:: js

   function makeAdder(b) {
     return a => a+b;
   }

   let d6 = s.evaluate(`(${makeAdder})`)(4);
   d6(1); // 5

Both approaches let the generated function close over the endowment, but
using the ``endowments`` argument makes them available globally
everywhere inside the evaluated code, whereas passing them as an
argument makes them only available to the function that the code yields,
which might enable finer-grained POLA.

The most common use for endowments (of either sort) is to safely allow
in-Realm code access facilities from outside the realm. For example, the
Realm’s ``consoleMode: 'allow'`` feature is implemented with something
like:

.. code:: js

   console.log('this is the real console object');
   function makeConsole() {
     return {
       log(...args) {consoleEndowment.log(...args);}
     }
   }

   const newConsole = s.evaluate(`(${makeConsole})`, {consoleEndowment: console});
   s.evaluate('console.log(4)', { console: newConsole });

Wrapping endowments like this is critical for security, because the
simple approach would reveal an outer-realm object to the confined code,
which it could use to escape confinement:

::

   function evil() {
     const outerObject = consoleEndowment.__proto__.__proto__.constructor;
     outerObject.__proto__.toString = obj => 'haha';
   }

   s.evaluate(`(${evil})`, { consoleEndowment: console });
   {}.toString(); // prints 'haha'

The key is that we evaluate trusted code to generate the safe endowment,
and only pass the safe endowment to the untrusted code. Every object in
the system should be examined to identify which realm it is coming from
(outer or inner), and never ever reveal outer-realm objects to untrusted
code. Even passing a collection of safe inner-realm objects to untrusted
code enables a confinement breach:

.. code:: js

   const safeConsole = ...;
   const safeAdder = ...;
   s.evaluate(`(${untrustedCode})`, { collection: { safeConsole, safeAddres } });
   // the 'collection' object is outer-realm, and enables a breach

The safest approach is to build a bunch of outer-realm helper functions,
bundle your entire application into a single string that defines a
bootstrap function which accepts those helpers as an argument, then
invoke the bootstrap function. Other patterns are in development,
specifically ones that use ``require`` or ``import`` and a manifest of
authorities to implement safe module loading.

The ``SES.makeSESRootRealm()`` call takes an options bundle. This
affects what features of the realm are enabled or disabled. The default
is to provide full confinement, which means that calling
``s.evaluate(code)`` (with no endowments, and discarding the return
value) will never affect the outer realm, no matter what ‘code’ might
contain. (This is clearly useless, like asking whether a tree falling in
the woods makes a sound if there’s nobody around to hear it). The
default is also fully deterministic: no aspects of the platform will
affect the execution of the code.

The options bundle can accept some keys which weaken these properties in
exchange for other useful behavior.

-  ``SES.makeSESRootRealm({consoleMode: 'allow'})``: the default setting
   removes the ``console`` from the global scope, but setting this to
   ``allow`` brings it back. The in-realm ``console`` is not as
   fully-featured as the usual one that browsers or Node.js provides,
   but the most common methods are present.
-  ``errorStackMode: 'allow': To prevent confinement breaches, several platform-specific properties of Error objects are removed. Unfortunately this breaks the display of line numbers and file names, stack traces, and frequently the Error string itself. Exceptions that are not caught normally cause Node to exit with a stack trace: the SES default setting causes Node to print``\ undefined\`
   and exit with no other explanation, which is particularly annoying.
   We currently recommend turning this on only temporarily while
   debugging an uncaught exception. Do not turn it on outside of
   debugging, because we believe it causes a confinement breach.
   Hopefully we’ll find a way to fix this and enable sensible Error
   reporting without enabling a breach, at which point we’ll change the
   default value.
-  ``mathRandomMode: 'allow'``: Since SES is supposed to be
   deterministic, ``Math.random()`` is a problem. By default it is
   disabled, and calling it throws an exception. When this mode is
   ``allow``, Math.random is enabled. This introduces non-determinism,
   but if the platform’s PRNG is sound, it should not enable the
   confined code to sense a covert channel, nor should it enable
   communication between otherwise isolated objects.
-  ``dateNowMode: 'allow'``: Allowing ``Date.now()`` to return the
   current time would both cause non-determinism *and* allow the reading
   of covert channels (enabling communication between isolated objects),
   and most applications don’t need it, so this is disabled by default
   too. This affects both the static ``Date.now()`` call and the
   zero-argument ``new Date()`` constructor.
-  ``intlMode: 'allow'``: The platform normally supplies a default
   locale, for use in ``Intl.DateTimeFormat`` and ``Intl.NumberFormat``
   calls that don’t supply a specific locale to use. This platform
   locale introduces nondeterminism, so these must be disabled. The
   default setting is to delete the entire ``Intl`` object, but setting
   this to ``allow`` brings everything back. We may be able to bring
   back most of ``Intl`` by default, but platforms currently appear to
   supply the platform-default locale even to calls that supply a
   specific one, if the requested locale is not available (e.g.
   ``Intl.NumberFormat('es')`` will return the default locale’s
   formatter function if it doesn’t have a Spanish one available), which
   will take more work to tame.
-  ``rexexpMode: 'allow'``: several platforms provide non-standard
   properties on regexps that would enable communication between
   otherwise isolated objects. These are removed by default, but ‘allow’
   would let them remain (enabling a confinement breach).

The realm controller object returned by ``SES.makeSESRootRealm()`` has
basically three useful properties:

-  ``s.evaluate(code, endowments)``: described above
-  ``s.global``: this is the (frozen) global object inside the new
   Realm. Not actually very useful.
-  ``s.makeRequire(config)``

``makeRequire`` is a helper function to construct an in-realm
``require`` object, so that the same code can be run outside of SES
(where it uses Node.js’s normal ``require()`` feature), or inside SES
(where it uses the helper’s version). It takes a ``config`` object that
names the modules that can be imported, and describes what they should
get when they do the import. The configuration syntax is intended to
protect outer-realm objects against accidental exposure (which would
enable a confinement breach).

.. code:: js

   const Nat = require('@agoric/nat');
   const SES = require('ses');
   const s = SES.makeSESRootRealm();
   function mymod(x) {
     return x+x;
   }

   const req = s.makeRequire({'@agoric/nat': Nat, double: mymod})
   function inner(y) {
     const double = require('double');
     const Nat = require('@agoric/nat');
     return double(Nat(y));
   }
   const inner = s.evaluate(`(${inner})`, {require: req});
   inner(1); // 2
   inner(-1); // Error since -1 is not a natural number

If the value of a config object element is a function, that function
will be stringified, then evaluated inside the realm, then hardened, and
the result is used as the module value (i.e. it is returned by any
``require(modname)`` done while that ``require`` endowment is in scope).
This works for simple standalone functions that are designed to be
stringified this way, like the ``Nat`` from ``@agoric/nat`` and the
``mymod`` function above. This won’t work for functions that depend upon
external references.

Note that ``makeRequire`` has an internal cache of modules, so any
module that creates some mutable state (and makes it possible for
callers to interact with it) may enable communication between otherwise
isolated clients. A future version of makeRequire might help with the
creation of “pure” modules that do not enable this unauthorized
communication.

If the value of a configuration element is an object, ``makeRequire``
evaluates its ``.attenuatorSource`` property to get a function, then
invokes that function with the rest of the configuration value. The
result is hardened and used as the new module. This is intended to help
build attenuating wrappers around external authorities.

We expect to change this API a lot. Eventually it should grow into a
safe module loader, to enable some new variant of ``s.evaluate`` that
looks more like a module load (with a corresponding manifest of
acceptable authorities).

Javascript’s ``eval()`` is a one-argument evaluator: it takes source
code and evaluates it, producing a value or a function. The native
``eval()`` allows that source code to access the same lexical scope as
the ``eval`` itself, which makes it unsafe for use on untrusted code.

Instead, SES offers a “safe two-argument evaluator”. The “safe” property
means that it doesn’t give access to the scope of the invoker, making it
safe to use with untrusted code. The second argument is a set of
endowments to provide in place of that unsafe caller’s scope.

From outside a Realm, you use ``s.evaluate(code, endowments)`` to invoke
this safe two-argument evaluator. From *inside* a Realm, you instead of
``SES.confine(code, endowments)``. This does the same thing, but acts
“in-place” (from inside a realm).

If the code provided to ``s.evaluate()`` throws an error, the error
object is mapped into an outer-Realm ``Error`` type before being
exposed, to avoid accidents. The error object thrown by ``SES.confine``
is from the same realm as the ``SES`` object.

We also have a ``confineExpr`` variant. TODO: how exactly does this
differ, when would you use it?

TODO: ambient ``SES`` within a realm is likely to go away, in favor of
``require('ses')`` and a special ``s.makeRequire()`` mode (just like
``require('@agoric/harden')`` is special). Not sure if that’s good
enough, or if the safe two-argument ``eval`` is important enough to
expose in some easier way.
